we survived and we're here so this is it
the last time that People magazine will
sit down with President Barack Obama and
first lady Michelle Obama at the White
House to sit down with them at the White
House for their final print interview as
president and first lady it was just
great to sort of see the arc of this
historic journey we talked about what is
going to be next for them how they're
feeling about the transition to the next
president and what life has been like
for them living in the White House for
the last eight years they talked to us
about everything from watching their
girls grow up in that fishbowl but also
the relationship that the president
developed with his mother-in-law and
what Michelle really thinks of his dad
jokes I try to cut the cheek she's been
cutting up that's a queen Michelle and
Italian Sacha with your jokes that drove
them away
here it is people at the White House
with the Obamas the final in
[Music]
here we are in the White House the Red
Room just a little bit longer mrs. Obama
you famously said last summer I wake up
every morning in a house that was built
by slaves and I watched my daughter's
two beautiful black young women head off
to school waving goodbye to their father
the President of the United States do
you have that thought in your mind on
the day you moved in oh no no that's too
deep no you're moving in the day you're
moving in you're frantic you're trying
to figure out where are the bathrooms
and what does this door lead to
I mean the chaotic nature of the
transition for the family I mean it's
smooth but at the same time it's very
surreal and you don't have time to
reflect or think about the meaning or
the magnitude of what you're doing until
months after you've lived in that house
so maybe that thought happened by the
summer maybe it was summertime I started
when they were actually out on the lawn
playing but that's it's it's a whirlwind
coming into this this life from a
relative state of normalcy when that
symbolism hit you it must have been it
must have been a very powerful moment
for you yeah yeah I mean you know there
are so many surreal powerful moments you
know watching my mother transition into
this house knowing where she comes from
from a working-class even poorer than
working-class upbringing to seeing her
standing on the Truman balcony and
representing this country is the first
grandmother I mean for me those moments
are just as surreal as watching the
girls go through it because her life was
vastly different than anything I could
have imagined let alone what we've
experienced here with her in the White
House my first interview with Michelle
in 2007 her mom was there and you know
we included her in our photo shoot that
day with the girls so People magazine
has always had a kind of special
relationship with
Marian Robinson how has that experience
living with your mother-in-law it bonded
you in a way that you didn't expect what
I love my mother-in-law first of all she
protects me for Michelle so if you know
Michelle's mad at me or something she'll
be like he's a nice boy stop it and
thanks mom but but we were already very
very close I where she was invaluable
was providing continuity and perspective
for our girls because as great a mom as
Michelle is and I try to do my best as a
dad to have that intergenerational
relationship for for them to be with
their grandma the same way they were on
74th and Euclid in the Southland South
Shore neighborhood where her mom's house
and where Michelle grew up and and to
know that even though you're in this
different environment there's a there's
a continuity there and you know it was
also fun to see her discover things
because his Michelle said she grew up in
a much more restricted time and place
and I think for a lot of African
Americans of a certain generation and
they didn't allow themselves always to
dream big about what they might
experience and sometimes Michelle's
mom's instinct is to well I I shouldn't
do that you know and so Michelle be well
we're going to Rome to and the Vatican
to meet the Pope well okay suddenly
she's there and she's looking at the
Sistine Chapel and she's having an
audience with you know
holy see and and it's magical for her
and she is loving it so in some ways you
also get a sense of of how much progress
we've made through her eyes and and
through the experiences that she's
having during this administration there
was a huge vegetable garden planted
during this administration Girl Scouts
were sleeping on the South Lawn there
was hip-hop dancing the White House has
been so much fun with her to attend I
think one of the most enduring legacies
of the Obama presidency is that the
president first lady went out of their
way to make this high office the highest
of offices truly accessible to every
American and every American child so
while it's always been a cliche anybody
can grow up to be president I think that
they actually put faces to that I've
been here for many outside-the-box
activities including sleeping on the
South Lawn with the Girl Scouts you've
cleared out the furniture at hip-hop
classes in these rooms was it a
conscious decision that you were going
to make the White House fun accessible
in some way that it hadn't been before
and what was the one idea that was
brought to you that you finally said no
that's too crazy
oh we do that yeah I've done a lot of
stuff so I'm not sure that there have
been any limits to your crazy probably
something I can't even but yeah it was a
conscious effort I mean we've talked
about wanting this to open this house up
as wide as possible and to make sure
that that folks feel like this is their
home folks who normally wouldn't gain
access to to these walls you know it's
important for young people in particular
our kids kids of all backgrounds of
every race and every socio-economic
background to feel like they have a
place in the nations house and to do
that you have to do things that make
them feel comfortable as well and if
it's hip-hop dancing well let's do it
you know if it's a sleepover on the
South Lawn with the Girl Scouts didn't
let's do it let's give it a try let's
breathe some why
into this place and it also helps that
we have kids you know I mean we think
about what activities they would love to
see here we know what kids won't know
what our girls want to do and it's
helped get them to be willing to go to
some of the things with us a few things
help you as time went on they're all
like you noticed this year you barely
saw the rain but that's what teenagers
know I think that's right
early on there was this notion that if
you break traditions and do things a
different way that somehow the dignity
of the office or the the reverence in
which this has held somehow is changed
and we never bought into that
you
[Music]
hi friend Obama and Michelle except live
from Brooklyn
are you gonna have a big party before
you
if so
sadly we are going to have a big party
before we leave office but I'll be
honest with you it's going to be after
your bedtime it's going to be kind of a
grown-up party but if you want to come
and see some of the Christmas
decorations we'll see if we can be in
touch the President and mrs. Obama have
always been really relaxed and open and
so while they've always been very
careful about guarding Sasha and Malia's
privacy they're also proud parents who
can't help themselves but tell funny
stories about the girls or get weepy
about thinking about them going off to
college they're both very very proud of
their daughters Sasha and Malia they
feel like despite the incredible strange
life that the girls must have had these
past eight years
that they have really succeeded in
giving them some normalcy and and
stability and discipline that they
really believe that both of their
daughters are great kids and and now
great young women will your daughters
miss living here or are you are they
really ready for some some more normalcy
than this place provides well but look
they're ready to get out just out from
their parents house the fact that their
parents house is the White House may add
to it but Emily is she's going off to
college she's she's a grown woman and I
know that you know well legally she's
still our baby but Sasha you know is on
her way and I think there's a
sentimentality but this place that
they've had so many amazing experiences
and the people here the staff are part
of the family I think it is different
for them than for most kids in that when
they leave they won't be able to come
back home in a lot of ways
and I know Mele is spoken about that
that maybe she regrets the fact that she
won't have that home base in the same
room that you know they love their rooms
and what they've made memories in there
so that's that's over with
but there they look better they're ready
to yeah they're ready to get get out of
the nest yeah I we don't think they're
ready but they certainly earlier now for
eight years you as a twosome have lived
under an intense pressure that few
people can understand what effect did
that have on your marriage yeah it's
definitely brought us closer I mean the
brach talks about this all the time I
mean before we moved here he spent most
of our marriage particularly with young
kids commuting in some way shape or form
when he was state senator we stayed in
Chicago and he commuted back and forth
from Springfield and Illinois and then
he became a u.s. senator because I had a
profession we stayed in Chicago he
commuted back and forth so it wasn't
until we moved to the White House that
we were together seven days a week that
we could have dinner together that he
had time to coach the girls teams and
you know go to all the events you know
yes the job you know carries its
stresses for sure you know I always say
that nobody knows what it feels like to
wake up and look at the morning paper
and know that every headline good or bad
is your responsibility wherever it's
happening in the world there is a there
is a weightiness there is a heaviness to
that that no other person even in the
administration really understands so
there's that and when you feel that
burden you know you really have to fall
back on the normalcy and the love of
your family you know I think probably
some of the best moments for Barack is
when he could come up on that elevator
come to the second floor sit down at the
dinner table and have no one care about
anything he does you know at all I mean
literally I just talked over talked
around he'd be the last four oh by the
way dead oh yeah what did you do
uh yeah they are usually getting up and
leaving but by the time it gets to me I
did have an interesting conversation
with Prime Minister thanks Owen so I
gotta go do my homework sorry but that
is a grounding you know it experience um
and our travel together you know I mean
we've you know I wish we could have done
more I mean there was a lot of divide
and conquer you know I could travel when
the girls were on vacation but the trips
that we did take as a family or ones
that we'll remember for the rest of our
lives and their trips that you don't
take they're not normal family vacations
and those experiences have definitely
brought us together in ways that we
wouldn't have if we weren't here well
and I also think that watching Michelle
as first lady has just increased you
know my awe and respect for her because
in some ways she had to adapt to both a
life that she might not have chosen for
herself but also there's no blueprint
for being first lady and to see her and
her team be able to shape the culture
and have such an impact on our military
families and on health and wellness and
you know be at once really impactful on
policy but also fun you know it it's fun
when you see
your spouse shine and she's shown
you
[Music]
i President Obama and this is Obama
- shake up and I'm five years old and I
wanna know who tells more jokes oh gosh
the president tells more bad jokes I I
will say this Jacob
Michelle is actually funnier than me
mainly because she teases me but I can't
tease her I think that's fair so she
makes a lot of fun of my ears oh they're
so big she talks about how gray my hair
has become so white she talks about how
slow I talk oh god he's slow I can't say
anything about her and she gets mad new
you can't so I guess she's funnier when
we were going to the White House to
interview the President and First Lady I
was so curious how they felt about the
last election you know nobody had fought
harder and more vocally for Hillary
Clinton then Michelle Obama had felt
like you went out on an emotional limb
really in this small campaign what was
an election night like for you I went to
bed
yes she did I did um you know I I tend
not to you know I don't watch debates I
don't like to watch the political
discourse I never have I barely did with
him
you know I just you know once you do
what you can do you know then you rest
easy it's it was in the hands of the
American people I think anything that I
felt about the election I said and you
know I and I stand by this is this is
our democracy and this is how it works
and so we are ready to to work with the
next administration and make sure that
they are as successful as they can be
because that's what's best for this
country I think it's worth noting that
you know her mrs. Obama's mantra through
the campaign was when they go low we go
high
I think they've stayed high and that's I
think how they want history to remember
them and the closure of their
administration look I think that as I've
said subsequent to the election there
are deep differences in vision between
ourselves and the incoming
administration but ultimately we're all
on the same team seeing the two of you
come to the White House eight years ago
you know it was it was a symbol of just
how far we've come as a culture then
during the election and since the
election there has been so much misogyny
and racism and bigotry in the cultural
discourse a lot of people feel like
we've taken a huge step back do you feel
like we've taken a step back look but
people always ask he always seems so
calm and I tell people now part of its
been born Hawaii whether it's really
good you can always take take a plunge
into the ocean so that'll show you add
but also I'm somebody who never believes
the hype when things are going good and
doesn't despair when things don't work
at your way the truth of the matter is
that when I got elected there was still
racism and misogyny and anti-gay
sentiment in America well what it
signified was that for the majority of
Americans we have made enormous progress
I think that in the wake of this
election those same elements are still
there but it doesn't negate all the
progress that's been made but this is a
big complicated country it always has
been history doesn't move in a straight
line at zigs and zags and it goes
backwards and forwards and and culture
is a complicated thing it's organic and
and and so you can never just say
alright we're finished with that that's
kind of done now let's move on to the
next thing the the battle to be vigilant
in on behalf of kindness and courtesy
and tolerance and fairness and equality
that's a day-to-day thing that each of
us are responsible for and I remain
hugely optimistic about the trend lines
partly because our kids and their
generation and you meet with them you
know you talk to Malia and Sasha the
idea that you discriminate against
somebody because they had a different
sexual orientation they it's crazy to
them and and and I should know just so
that this doesn't look like it's a
select sample and I've gone to college
campuses and met with college
Republicans and they think that would be
crazy too
it's not just a partisan issue and so
that that generation right behind us
and I believe each successive generation
as long as we're doing our job of being
good models for it
they're going to move this country for
it in a better direction proudest moment
or what your what the future holds for
the Obama family who they're so I'm so
many proud moments I mean I could say
one week we survived and are superb
we're here our kids our kids aren't
crazy there's that there's that our kids
are crazy but all that the work that I
know that our my team has done on the
initiatives I mean it you know when I
came in we we talked about not wanting
to just do symbolic things that we
wanted to move the needle on the issues
that we took on and I think that we can
say that we have on every single issue
whether it's getting more attention
around the plight of our military
families and rally in the nation around
it we change to help change the culture
around how our kids eat and how we move
we're seeing graduation college
graduation rates and high school
graduation rates go up and we're going
to if you talk about the future we're
going to keep tackling those issues you
know we're going to rest a second we're
going to take a breather you know as I
told all of our staff here it's time for
us to tap out for a second people need
time to refresh and to reflect you know
I mean this is what these interviews are
saying what we haven't had time to do is
reflect on this and before you can
really you know push off hard on the
next part of the the journey of your
life you've got to kind of see what just
happened and understand it and know how
it's affected you and we're going to do
that and we have to be very conscious
about doing that because they're already
calls and requests to come and speak and
travel and do things and if we're not
careful we can be just as busy as we we
are this week and a month from now so I
want him to sleep you know and want to
travel a little bit just for fun you
think absolutely it was back to be maybe
a little bit more of an activist
ex-president now that you know we have
this uncertain future agenda I would
have been active no matter what happened
in the election because I'm only 55
years old and me puttering around the
house you know doing Sudoku is
michelle's me but it would not be good I
would drive yeah we'd all be unhappy yes
so couple of things like point out
number one in terms of pride I am
serious about the how proud I am of my
daughters and they are they are just
really good people separate and apart
from them being my kids and I'm
admittedly biased but if you talk to
people who have met him or known and are
little less biased I think they'll say
that they're kind smart thoughtful kids
that treat everybody with respect and
that's something you always worry about
I could not be prouder of my wife as I
already said I think she has been
extraordinary in this job even as she's
also held our family together and and
made it work so well I could not be
prouder of my team everybody here worked
really hard and did a good job this time
I will say I thought that the president
seemed weary and in some way he seemed
more soulful then I've I've seen him in
the past and I think you did see the
toll of the election and I also noticed
a fierceness to mrs. Obama's talk about
her husband well I have to say because I
don't want to leave this interview
without saying how proud I am of my
husband because all that he just said is
because of his leadership and the
example that he said not just as a
president but as a human being it's a
father he has been a role model to
millions of people from all backgrounds
and no one can dispute that you know I
don't care what party you belong to when
you think of father when you think of a
good husband somebody with strong values
all the things that people say they
admire most in people and want in a
leader Barack Obama has been that and
more smart the smartest still the
smartest person in the room and the
country is better for it as a result of
him and and excellent bad jokes I think
but she she actually ride a try to catch
she she's been cutting up that's a tree
Michelle and Malia Sasha with your jokes
that drove them away you know but my you
saw my nephews of the turkey right tour
and they love my jokes okay we're
talking about the great thing about a
people interview is you can sit down
with the president and you can talk
about the big issues you know but we
also look at them as human beings
and because it's people they feel
comfortable talking about what it has
been like to be married in the White
House and what it has been like to raise
two daughters in the White House we do
peel back the layer to the essence of
the person
what are they like as parents what are
they like as husband and wife
what are they like as people that just
everyday living with them is something
that we could uniquely do and because of
the relationship with them I think they
feel comfortable telling us that story
so they've been really generous with
their kind of personal lives and and
People magazine and that's been a
privilege
[Music]